How to use the BVH files from the 3dsMax-friendly release of the CMU
motion database.

v1.00 last update May 1, 2009 B. Hahne
Get the BVH data at: www.cgspeed.com in the Motion Capture section

This HOW-TO-USE-THESE-FILES.txt help file goes with the
3dsMax-friendly BVH files available at www.cgspeed.com in the Motion
Capture section. I also hope to do a short training video that
demonstrates these steps, and if/when that's complete I'll post it
somewhere near the download links for the BVH files.

I've tested these steps with 3dsMax 2009.  The conversion is
straightforward: you load the BVH data onto a Biped, save the data
back out in .BIP format, and then it's available to use with any
Biped.  It would also be possible for me to batch-convert all of the
Max-friendly BVH files to .BIP and simply make the .BIP files
available, however I thought it might be better to make the raw BVH
files available instead, in case people want to further edit them (via
text editor, script, or whatever you like) in some way.

Here's how to put any of the BVH files to use, within 3dsMax.  

1. Create a Biped via Create tab --> Systems -->Object Type rollout
--> Biped, then drag up in the main viewport to actually create the
Biped.  You can create the default Biped - there's no need to adjust
the spine link count, number of fingers, etc.

2. Make sure the Biped is selected, then go to the Motion tab.  You
should see a large number of rollouts available for the Biped.  Find
the Motion Capture rollout towards the bottom and expand it.

3. The upper left icon within the Motion Capture rollout should be
"Load Motion Capture file".  In 3dsMax 2009, the icon has a small file
folder above a small camera.  Click this button to start the BVH load
process.  An "Open" file dialogue box should appear.

4a. In the file dialogue box, "Files of type:" will probably default
to ".BIP".  Change this dropdown to ".BVH" so that you can see BVH
files.

4b. Still within the file dialogue box, navigate to the BVH file that
you want to open, select it, then click the Open button.

4c. You should get a warning message from Max that says it doesn't
recognize all of the joints in the BVH file.  It should say "The
following track names were found in the file and are unrecognized by
Biped: LHipJoint, RHipJoint, lowerback, lowerneck, lhand, LFingers,
LThumb, rhand, RFingers, RThumb".  If the warning message mentions any
OTHER joint names then there's a problem, but that shouldn't happen if
you're using the correct set of converted BVH files.  The
Carnegie-Mellon skeleton has a variety of joints that don't map onto
the 3dsMax Biped, so they're intentionally named in a way that
prevents Max from trying to incorporate them into the loaded data.

4d. Click "OK" on the warning message to make it go away.  Max should
now bring up a large complex window titled "Motion Capture Conversion
Parameters".

4e. In the Motion Capture Conversion Parameters window, towards the
top left of the window, set "Up Vector" to the "Y" radio button.  The
default is "Z".  The CMU dataset uses "Y" as the up axis, so we're
supposed to tell Max that in the BVH file, "Y" originally meant "up".
(3dsMax uses the Z axis as its up axis.)  You should be able to leave
all other parameters in this Parameters window at their default
settings.

4f.  Still in the Parameters window, click OK now that you've set Up
Vector to "Y".  Max should load the BVH file data.  The Biped
appearance will now change significantly, since Max completely
overhauls the Biped skeleton to match the BVH base skeleton that it's
just imported.  Don't worry if the shape of the skeleton doesn't look
anything like what your preferred skeleton will look like when you
actually animate.

5. Click the animation play button (lower right corner) to test the
playback of the data.  You should get a smooth playback of whatever
animation you've just loaded.

6a. Now we'll save the BVH data as a .BIP file so that we can use it
with any Max Biped.  Make sure the Biped is still selected, and that
the Motion tab is also still selected.  Open up the "Biped" rollout
(it's open by default in Max 2009) and click the little diskette icon
which is for "Save File".  Max should bring up a "Save As" dialogue
box.

6b. In the Save As dialogue box, make sure that "Save as type:" is set
to .BIP.  Navigate to a directory where you want to save the data,
type a file name in the File Name box, and click Save.

7. Now you can test the .BIP file.  Create a new Biped.  I usually
create my new Biped at least 2x larger than the original, so that it's
easy to compare the motions when I hit play.  You can give the new
Biped as many spine links as you want, you can add extra fingers, etc.
3dsMax seems to be pretty good about retargeting across Bipeds, so in
theory you should be able to create any Biped that you like.

8. Select the new Biped and again go to the Motion tab, so that you
see all of the rollouts available for the second (new) Biped.

9a. Under the Biped rollout (NOT the Motion Capture rollout), click
the "Load File" icon.  In 3dsMax 2009 this icon is immediately to the
left of the Save File icon that you used in step 6a above.  Max should
bring up an "Open" dialogue box to let you choose a .BIP file.

9b. Still in the Open dialogue box, choose the .BIP file that you
previously saved in step 6a and click Open to assign it to your second
Biped.  Your second Biped should immediately take on a pose similar to
the pose held by the original Biped.

10. Play back the animation and confirm that the new Biped matches the
motions of the original.  If you made the new Biped larger, Max will
adjust its step size and motions appropriately to the size of the
second Biped.

11. The CMU dataset isn't entirely clean.  In particular, you'll find
times when wrists or ankles will twist or flip incorrectly.  The
investigations I've done so far suggest that these problems aren't a
result of my conversion script (which attempts to preserve the
original data as much as possible, to the extent that it's usable by
Max), but rather are coming from the original captured data.
Techniques for cleaning up bothced keyframes on limbs are beyond the
scope of this little intro text file, however generally the approach
is to find the joint(s) with the problem and replace the data with new
keyframes that work, or simply delete the bad keyframes and make sure
that the transition across the keyframe gap looks clean.

